---
title: "A more user-friendly transparent mode, based on WireGuard"
date: 2022-10-28
weight: 10
authors:
  - fabio-valentini
---

[mitmproxy 9]({{< relref "releases/mitmproxy-9" >}}) ships with a new experimental proxy mode based on [WireGuard®](https://www.wireguard.com/).
This new mode makes it incredibly easy to set up proxying for other devices in your network,
and allows you to only proxy specific apps on Android.

<!--more-->

Connecting another device and routing its traffic through mitmproxy becomes as simple as connecting to a WireGuard VPN
--- either by using the WireGuard configuration file generated by mitmproxy, or by scanning the QR code that is shown
in the mitmweb interface: 

<figure>
<video controls>
    <source src="mitmweb-wireguard-android.mp4#t=0.4" type="video/mp4">
</video>
<figcaption>Setting up an Android smartphone (right) to use mitmweb (left).<br>The mitmproxy CA certificate has been preinstalled for this demo.</figcaption>
</figure>

## How it works

The core of this feature is implemented in the [mitmproxy-wireguard](https://pypi.org/project/mitmproxy-wireguard/)
Python package, which provides a user space implementation of a WireGuard server. It is a new dependency of mitmproxy
and ships with the latest release.

Because the WireGuard protocol operates by transmitting IP packets, this also involves running a network stack in
user space to parse incoming IP packets, construct outgoing IP packets, handle TCP connections, and process UDP
datagrams.

<br>
{{<
figure src="architecture.svg"
caption="Architecture of the WireGuard server implemented in `mitmproxy_wireguard`"
width="100%"
>}}
<br>

The interfaces which are provided by `mitmproxy_wireguard` were designed to match the APIs in the Python standard
library's `asyncio` module as closely as possible. In particular, the `TcpStream` provided by the package implements all methods of `asyncio.StreamReader` and `asyncio.StreamWriter` which are expected by mitmproxy, and can be used as a
drop-in replacement.

Oh, and did I mention this already? The `mitmproxy_wireguard` project is written in [Rust](https://rust-lang.org),
utilizing some great Rust libraries to implement this functionality --- most notably:

- [Tokio](https://tokio.rs), an asynchronous runtime for Rust.
- [boringtun](https://github.com/cloudflare/boringtun), an implementation of the WireGuard protocol.
- [smoltcp](https://github.com/smoltcp-rs/smoltcp), a standalone, user space TCP/IP stack.
- [PyO3](https://pyo3.rs), a project that provides Python ↔ Rust interoperability, including support for bridging 
  `async` runtimes of the two languages.
- [Maturin](https://maturin.rs/), a build tool for Python packages that are implemented in Rust.

## How to use it

In contrast to the existing `transparent` mode, the `wireguard` mode requires little to no manual configuration. Running
mitmproxy in this mode should be as simple as specifying `--mode wireguard`. By default, mitmproxy will try to load
existing WireGuard encryption keys from `~/.mitmproxy` and generate new keys if they don't exist yet.
As most WireGuard servers, it will listen on 51820/udp by default.

For example, running `mitmweb` with the new `wireguard` mode and using default settings is as simple as running:

```shell
mitmweb --mode wireguard
```

The mitmweb interface then shows the configuration file and QR code that can be used to connect clients to mitmproxy
via the WireGuard tunnel:

{{<
figure src="mitmweb-wireguard.png"
caption="WireGuard configuration and scannable QR code as shown by mitmweb"
width="80%"
>}}

## What's next?

Support for this WireGuard mode is still very new, and there are likely still bugs, but it should already work for basic
use cases. We're still [collecting feedback](https://github.com/mitmproxy/mitmproxy/issues/5592) (unless you're reading
this in the far future).

There's also a few things that do *not* work yet in this mode --- in particular, the support for IPv6 is still
incomplete, which is why the provided configuration for WireGuard clients will only route IPv4 traffic to mitmproxy.

## Acknowledgements

This project would not have been possible if not for the great ecosystem of existing Rust libraries for asynchronous
programming (tokio), low-level networking functionality (boringtun, smoltcp), and bridging the gap between Rust and
Python (pyo3, pyo3-log, pyo3-asyncio, maturin).

I would also like to thank [Maximilian Hils]({{< relref "/authors/maximilian-hils" >}}) for his mentorship and for supervising
my Bachelor thesis --- which, coincidentally, will be about "Implementing a WireGuard frontend for mitmproxy". 🙃


-----------------------

<small>"WireGuard" and the "WireGuard" logo are registered trademarks of Jason A. Donenfeld.</small>
